--- Page 1 ---
INTRODUCTION
TO
LUMMI LANGUAGE

BY AL CHARLES

 

--- Page 2 ---
Introduction to the Lummi Lan uage*

By

Mr. Al Charles
Lummi Indian Reservation
Bellingham, Washington

Prof. Richard Demers
University of Arizona
Tucson, Arizona

Prof. Elizabeth Bowman

Western Washington University
Bellingham, Washington

Copyright 1978

This work was supported in part by a grant from the Center

for Applied Linguistics. The C.A.L. funding was in turn the
result of a grant from the National Endowment for the Humanities
(CAL/NEH Indian Language Assistance Project, 1977). The

financial support of the Office of the Vice-President for Research
of the University of Arizona is also hereby gratefully acknow-

We would like to thank Dorothy Shank for her typing
assistance and editorial help.

Lummi Library
2522 Kwina Rd.
Bellingham, WA 98226

--- Page 3 ---
Dedication

This book is dedicated to Mr. Al Charles. In the
most important ways Mr. Charles is the author of this
book. The book is an outgrowth of the course on Lummi
that Mr. Charles taught in the Lummi community, and the
facts presented are part of what we learned in the hun-
dreds of hours that we have spent with Mr. Charles.

Mr. Charles is an ideal teacher. He is patient, thor-
ough, and has an obvious love for his language and his
people. We hope that the readers of this book will come
to appreciate the beauty, subtlety, and the expressive

power of the language that Mr. Charles has taught us.

Elizabeth Bowman

Richard Demers

--- Page 4 ---
ii
Foreword

These materials are intended for use by people
wishing to learn some basic grammatical features of the
Lummi language. Lummi is a complex language with the
ability to express anything that can be expressed in any
other language. One of the stories that one hears about
the Lummi language is that Lummi only has a few hundred
(or even a couple of thousand) words. This is false!
Lummi has tens of thousands of words, and combined with
the Lummi speaker's ability to create new words based on
already existing Lummi words, the Lummi vocabulary is
enormous.

Another statement that one hears about Lummi is that
it is a concrete language, and is therefore more suited
for expressing simple day-to-day items than abstract
ideas. Again, this is false! The most subtle and ab-
stract ideas are perfectly capable of being expressed in
Lummi. It is true that Lummi does not have readily avail-
able a vocabulary to express the items common to our tech-
nical world. But neither did English, originally. Just
as words were added to English to handle items such as
television, or automobile, Lummi is capable of doing
the same. [It would be an interesting exercise, in fact,
to see how an English speaker who is not familiar with
fishing would describe all the part of a complicated
Lummi reef net. To a Lummi speaker, the English des-

criptions might seem primitive and simple.

--- Page 5 ---
iii

The following introductory text and description of
the Lummi language is written at a moderately advanced
level, although it can be used as a basis for creating
more basic teaching materials on the Lummi language. The
individual teacher may want to emphasize certain points
and add additional material. There is, however, a blunt
fact which must be faced from the beginning: The Lummi
language for someone who knows only English is extremely
difficult. The sounds are quite different from the sounds
of English, and Lummi grammar is also very complicated to
an English speaker. Lummi grammar has its own logic, but
it differs in radical ways from English. This will be-
come clear as one reads and works through the chapters of
this book.

Lummi is a member of the Salish language family, the
largest group of languages in the Northwest. The Salish
family extends geographically from the Bella Coolas in
British Columbia to the Tillamooks in Oregon. Salish
Languages are also found in Alberta, Canada and also in
Idaho and Montana in the United States. The languages
located east of the Cascade Mountains are referred to as
Interior Salish languages, and those west of the Cascades
are labelled Coast Salish. Most of the Native American
languages in northern and western Washington belong to

the Salish family.

--- Page 6 ---
iv

Lummi can be subclassified as a dialect of Straits
Coast Salish, a family which includes Clallam, Samish,
Songish, Saanich, Sooke and Semiahmoo. Persons speaking
the Straits languages can all easily talk to each other.

The attempt has been made to use a non-technical
vocabulary in describing the properties of Lummi grammar.
However, Lummi is so complex that an honest description
must reveal some of this complexity. An attempt will be
made therefore to describe Lummi in straightforward terms.

The alphabet used in this description will be foreign
to most readers. At the time of the writing of this intro-
duction, the Lummi Tribal Council had not yet decided on
what alphabet to use. The alphabet used in this descrip-
tion is based on the alphabet developed by Terry and
Larry Thompson. What ever alphabet is ultimately chosen,
the one used in this description can be easily converted.
Once the alphabet used in this description is mastered,
the Lummi vocabulary in any article written about Lummi

in the most recent linguistic journals can be read.

--- Page 7 ---
Dedicati

Foreward

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

CONTENTS

CrloonoousDooodooo Do oUD OD oOU OOD ODd oO D Od Gb boob OdG i
Pee eee ee ee ee ee eee eee eee ee ee tenet eee li
1 - The Sounds of Lummi............ 0... eee ee eee 1
2 - Simple Lummi Sentences.........-....0000eee 11
3 - QUueStiONS...... cece cece eee eee ence tees 15
4 ~ Adjectives... ... cece cece eee tee eee eens 19
5 - Predicate Tenses... .. cece cece eee eee eens 23
6 - Verbal Objects... cece cece eee eee 27
7 ~ Dependent Clauses... . cee ee cece e reece enee 31
8 - Negative Sentences... .. cece cece ee een ee eaee 35
9 - The Passive Voice... .. ccc cee eee eee eee eens 40
10 - Interrogative Pronouns and nii-sentences..45
11 - How The Lummi People Came To Their
Present Location And How They Got Their
Name...Lummi Version.............02200 eee $1
69

Loy steko Wirt ogo ooOoOOUDDOODdUdd0U0D0000

--- Page 8 ---
Chapter 1

The Sounds of Lummi

0. The sounds of Lummi are very similar to those sounds
found in other Native American languages in the Northwest.
Linguists have noted that languages which are unrelated may
nevertheless share many features of sounds and grammar if
they are located in the same geographical area. In Europe,
for example, the Finnish and Hungarian languages bear no
known relationship to English, German, or French, although
the sound systems of these languages are relatively similar.
Likewise, many of the sounds of Lummi, a member of the Sa-
lishan language family, are similar to those sounds of the
Quileute (a Chimakuan language) or the Makah (a Wakashan
language). The Lummi, Quileute, and Makah languages have
never been shown to be genetically related.

Although many of the sounds of the languages of the
Native American languages of the Northwest are similar to
each other, many of these sounds (especially the consonants)
are very different from the sounds of the European languages.
Thus, for someone who speaks English and who wishes to speak
Lummi words correctly, a lot of practice will be necessary.

The sounds of Lummi are discussed below, and the best
way to learn them is to practice them in the presence of a
Lummi speaker. However, good approximations can be made
from tapes and if you do not have easy access to someone who

speaks Lummi, we recommend that you listen to some Lummi

--- Page 9 ---
which has been recorded.

There are two major types of sounds in the Lummi lan-
guage, vowels and consonants. In general terms, the dif-
ferent vowels are made by the different shape of the open
vocal tract when air is passing through. The consonant
sounds are those produced by either a narrowing, constric-
tion, or closure at one or more of the points along the vocal
tract. The vocal tract is the region extending from the

voice box (Adam's apple) to the lips.

ls Vowel Sounds. The vowel sounds are relatively easy,
and we begin with examples using familiar consonants that
are found in English.
1.1. The i-sound. This letter represents a sound that
varies between an 'ee' sound as in English 'beet' and the
sound in English 'say', although the vowel is more pure and
steady than it is in English. Listen to your teacher pro-
nmounce these words.
Examples: ni ‘there is, there are'

his ‘a long time ago'
1.2. The e-sound. This letter is usually pronounced like
the vowel sound in English 'man', although it may be pro-
nounced 'higher' like the vowel sound in 'get'. The Lummi

word for 'father', which sounds like the English word 'man'

is written men.

--- Page 10 ---
Examples: men 'father'

ten ‘'mother'
1.3. The e-sound. This letter (called schwa by linguists)
represents the emphasized vowel in English 'sun', and also
the sound in the unemphasized first vowel of ‘about’.
Examples: tomes ‘fur, velvet!

séles ‘hand!

Note: The vowel that has the main emphasis will be
noted with an accent mark. For example, in English, a
convict is a man who goes to prison after he has been con-
victed of breaking a law.

1.4. The o-sound. The o is similar to the sound of the
vowels in the English words 'bought' or ‘caught’.
Examples: soOsan 'mouth'

nos ‘fat!
1.5. The u-sound. This letter represents a sound which
varies between the vowel of English 'boot', and the lower
sound of 'boat'. It is usually pronounced in its lower
variety, although the example words are usually pronounced
in their higher variety.
Examples: tuwo ‘early'

i ' '
musmus cow

Bo The consonants. Many of the consonants of Lummi are

very different from those of English, and they will require

--- Page 11 ---
more work than the vowels for an English speaker who is
trying to speak Lummi. Some of the sounds are very much
like those found in English, and we begin our discussion
with these.
2.1. The p-sound. The p- sound is like that of English.
It is strongly aspirated (a strong puff of air is expelled
when the p is released).
Examples: laplét ‘priest' (borrowing from French)

snep "advice!
2.2. The t-sound., The t-sound is like that of English.
Like the p-sound, it is strongly aspirated.
Examples: timast ‘to do something vigorously’

titisan ‘up the river’
2.3. The s-sound. Pronounce the s-sound like English s.
Examples: sne ‘name!

swem ‘horse clam'
2.4. The m, n, 1 and h sounds are either the same or very
similar to their equivalent sounds in English. Words with
these sounds have already been given in the earlier examples.
2.5. Sounds which occur in English but which use different
symbols.
2.5.1. The n. This symbol represents a sound which is found
in English but is not represented in the English alphabet.
An m is like a b with the nasal passages open, and an n is like

ad with the nasal passages open, and an n (called engwa) is

--- Page 12 ---
like a g with the nasal passages open. This sound is usually
written as ng in English. When one says the English word
"sing', the ng is actually just the single sound n. It is
not n plus g. The normal n-sound is made with the tip of
the tongue touching the roof of the mouth. The n-sound is
made with the back of the tongue touching further back along
the roof of the mouth. In English the n-sound only appears
at the end or in the middle of words. In Lummi n can appear
not only at the end or the middle of the words, it can also
appear at the beginning of words.
Examples: son 'to go up (into the woods)'

ténan ‘evening, dusk {before it is dark)'

nane? ‘child’
2.5.2. The S-sound. This letter stands for the sound usually
written as sh in English.
Examples: stomeS 'warrior'

Semat ‘land that appears at low tide'
2.5.3. The €-sound. This symbol represents the sound usually
represented by ch in English.
Examples: Sané "harvest, catch'

€3nes "tooth!
2.5.4. The ?-sound. The symbol that looks like a poeecion
mark without the dot at the bottom is a symbol for a glottal
stop. It is very common in Lummi. This sound is made by

stopping the flow of air from your lungs in your throat. Try

--- Page 13 ---
exhaling and stopping the air without closing your mouth.

When you've done this you've used your vocal cords (the
elastic bands in your voice box) to stop the air. Every

word in Lummi that sounds as if it begins with a vowel actually

begins with a glottal stop (the same is true of English).

Examples: ?ané? "come!
si?em 'sir' (Lummi term of respect, related to
the word Sehome)
s?emeS  'Samish'

To say this last word, make the s-sound, stop the flow
of air with your vocal cords (make the glottal stop) and then
continue into the 2emas part. Listen to your teacher do this
a few times and you'll be able to do it.

2.6. Sounds not found in English.

2.6.1. The q-sound. The q-sound is similar to the k sound
of English (Lummi has very few words with k), but the sound
is made with the tongue touching further back along the roof

of the mouth than the k in English 'car'.

Examples: qalas 'dull'
qen 'steal'
géngen ‘thief!

2.6.2. The x-sound. The x-sound is similar to the q-sound,
with the main difference being that the flow of air is not
stopped. There is a distinct scraping sound as the tongue
constricts the flow of air past this point along the roof

of the mouth.

--- Page 14 ---
Examples: sxana "Leg'
2ex-n 'to say'

2.6.3. The c-sound. This sound is similar to a ts sequence
of sounds, although it is actually a single sound. It is
like the é-sound, only instead of being made with the area
just in back of the tip of the tongue, the c-sound is made
with the tip of the tongue. This sound is found in only a
few Lummi words, although it occurs in one of the most common
words: ca 'the, a!
2.6.4. The J-sound. The J-sound, also called a voiceless
1, is called a lateral fricative by linguists. It carries
the label lateral because when the tongue tip is touching
just behind the teeth, the air passes on both sides of the
tongue. It is called a fricative because the tongue is con-
stricted against the roof of the mouth so that noise (friction)
is created. It is a very common sound in Lummi. To make this
sound, make an ] and then as the air is flowing, stop your
vocal cords from vibrating (you can do this, don't worry)
and raise the tongue closer to the roof of the mouth so that
noise is created. With a little practice, this sound is re-
latively easy to make.
Examples: sJéni? ‘wife, woman'

s1amax“ 'rain'

2.6.5. The sounds k”, q™”, x“, and x”.

--- Page 15 ---
The sounds that these symbols represent are also very much
like sounds already discussed. The raised w indicates that
they are all accompanied by lip rounding. This feature of
rounding of the lips is also called labialization by lin-
guists. The k” sound is like the English quin quick. The
x” sound is a velar fricative, which means that air passing
between the back of the tongue and the roof of the mouth is
constricted and makes a scraping, whistling sound. It is
similar to the sound one would make if one were imitating
the blowing of the winter wind. The qY sound is very similar
to the k” sound with the main difference being that the con-
tact point of the tongue is even further back along the roof
of the mouth. This sound therefore has a somewhat 'deeper'

sound than the k*.

Examples: k* k“agil ‘early in the morning'
k“Snet 'Take it!'
x” x“i?lom ‘rope, thread!
x“itan ‘jump!
qY qveni 'seagull'
qve?on ‘mosquito!
x" x“on ‘to cry'

x“3tq’am ‘noisy, rushing water' (Lummi
name for Bellingham (Whatcom) .)

2.6.6. The glottalized sounds of Lummi: p, t’, ¢, @, kY, 4,

a“, (4). One of the most distinctive sets of sounds in Lummi

--- Page 16 ---
is the glottalized series. The term glottalization refers to
the manner of articulation. In discussing the glottal stops
earlier, we mentioned that fact that the vocal cords can be
closed, stopping the air flow. The air stream from the lungs
can also be stopped in the upper part of the vocal tract at
the same time. Thus there can be two points of closure at
the same time. A stop made in the upper part of the vocal
tract (for example, all of the sounds listed at the beginning
of this section) can be glottalized if the voice box (with
closed vocal cords) is raised just before the stop is released.
When the voice box is raised, the air pressure inside the
vocal tract increases because the cavity is made smaller.
When the upper stop is released, it does so under more pres-
sure than is the case for the unglottalized stops, and a dis-
tinctive popping sound can be heard. Actually, the glottali-
zation feature may be quite subtle, and much practice is re-

quired before this feature can always be identified.

 

Examples: p- sound pawi 'flounder'
po?n ‘to swell up'
t’-sound t’élaw ‘arm!
st’élenex” ‘medicine'
é-sound ¢isten ‘antler’
Liget "to cut it!
é-sound @3neé ‘crowded, jammed'

 

23mas ‘dried herring eggs'

 

--- Page 17 ---
10

 

q-sound gé?ni 'teen-aged girl'
dep "to gather'
q“-sound q“Slan ‘ear'
qual ‘cooked, ripe’

 

2.6.7. The i-sound. The 'glottalized lateral affricate'
is one of the most important Lummi sounds. Many Native
American languages of the Northwest have this sound. It is
made by suddenly releasing the air along the sides of the
tongue. Begin by making an 1, and then stop the air from
flowing by raising the tongue so that the air flow is
blocked. Next, keeping the tongue tip temporarily on the
roof of the mouth, release the air on both sides of the
tongue making a 'popping sound'. Do not drop the sides of
your tongue too far, since the effect you are striving for
is the sound of the air passing along the sides of the
tongue. The glottalization feature enhances the popping
aspect of the sounds and helps contribute to its unique
character. This sound will take lots of practice. . Observe
some Lummi speakers and try to imitate them.

Examples: hi? 'like, love'

Aax“lex” ‘oyster’

--- Page 18 ---
1i

Chapter 2

Simple Lummi Sentences

is In Lummi sentences the verb very often comes first.
1) x€it-sen ce swdy?qa? 'I know the man.!
know-I the man
2) x€it-sx” sea széni? ‘You know the woman.!

know-you the woman

3) -x€it-s ca swirqd?al ca sway?qa?
'The boy knows the man.'!
4) x€it-2 sa slen®6?az ‘We know the girl.!

NOTE 1): The word meaning 'I' in sentence (1) is -san. It
is attached to the verb xtit 'know' and forms a single unit
of pronunciation. When 'you' is the subject add -sx“ to the
verb. When 'we' is the subject add -Z, and whenever the sub-
ject is third person (he, she, it, or they) add -s to the
verb.

NOTE 2): The definite (or indefinite) article is usually
ce in Lummi, although Se- will occur chiefly with feminine
nouns (sa sléni? 'the woman'),

NOTE 3): The forms swi?qo?et and sZen&6?al are diminutive
forms of the nouns sway?qe? and sléni?, respectively. The
term diminutive simply means 'a smaller version of'. Thus

a boy is seen to be a smaller version of a man. The term
sienéo?ei means 'little girl', whereas gé?ni? is a teen-aged
girl.

Ze Here are some additional simple Lummi sentences.

--- Page 19 ---
12

5) len-i-t-sen ca sway?qa?
‘I'm looking at the man.'
6) len-i-t-sx” ca ?élan
"You are looking at the house.'
7) 1én-nax“-san se sléni?
'I see (caught a glimpse of) the woman.'
8) lén-nex“-2% ce sténex"

"We see (caught a glimpse of) the salmon.’

NOTES: 'To look at' and 'to see' are both based on the same
verb root len- ‘see'. When -nex“ follows the verb, the idea

of the verb is that the action is not under the control of the

subject of the sentence. The addition of a t oor -i-t in-

 

dicates that the subject has some degree of control over the
action. The term 'control' has, in fact, been given to the
item 't' by the linguists Terry and Larry Thompson. Lummi

is very logical in these constructions. When you look at
‘something you consciously and willfully maintain your vision
on it (len-i-t). When you catch a glimpse of something, or
happen to see it, you do not do it willfully. If your eyes
are open, you will see it (len-nex”). Some additional sen-
tences utilizing -nex” and -t- will further demonstrate their

use in Lummi.

9) é3s-nex“-sen "I hit it (accidentally).'

10) és$-t-son 'I hit it (on purpose).'

11) xi2-noxY-san ‘I scratched it (accidentally).'
12) xit-t-sen 'I scratched it (on purpose).'

--- Page 20 ---
15:

NOTES: 1) Sometimes the word éas 'hit' will be pronounced
ésa. For the time being learn to use ¢as with nex” and tsa
with -t. 2) We will translate some of the Lummi sentences
into present or past time (tense) in English. Tense is not

as important in Lummi as in English.

 

 

3. Additional vocabulary.
a. ge?ni? ‘teenage girl'
b. men 'father'
c. ten ‘mother'
d.  sq*amdy? ‘dog!
e. pis 'cat' (domestic)
£. none? ‘child!
sa?ey?Ean ‘younger brother, sister, or cousin'
h, BeéyoL ‘older brother, sister, or cousin’
Bite pawi 'flounder'
j. sx“?ilen "table!
4, Translation exercises. Translate the following Lummi

sentences into English.
a.  len-i-t-san ca gé@?ni?
b.  len-nex“-2J ca pawi

c.  len-ne-s ca pi co sqYamay? (Note: nax”+s becomes
ne-s in Lummi)

d. len-i-t-s ca sqvamay? ca pis
e. xtit-sx” ca Seyal

3 ay 2
£. xic-t-s ca piS ca nana?

--- Page 21 ---
14

Translate the following English sentences into Lummi.

a. The man caught a glimpse of the flounder (look at
note in 4c).

b. The older brother is looking at the younger sister.

c. The child hit the cat (on purpose).

d. The mother hit the child (accidentally).

e. You are watching (looking at) the child.

f. We know the father and the mother (use ?i? for the

word ‘and').

--- Page 22 ---
15
Chapter 3

Questions.

i. How to ask a question in Lummi,

a) xtit-a-sx” ca swdy?qa?

"Do you know the man?’
b) xéit-e-sen se széni?

‘Do I know the woman?!
c) ?ilen-a-2% (2) ca séénex”

‘Do we eat salmon?!

Questions that require a yes or no answer in Lummi
can be made by inserting an -a- element after the verb
(and other sentence initial items as we will learn later),
but before some of the subject pronouns. The third person
pronoun, however, requires that the question particle
appear to the right of a subject pronoun.

d) 1én-na-s-o ce swoy?qa?

"Did he/they get a glimpse of the man?'
For the present, then, if the subject is first or second
person (-sen, 1S als -1), the question particle will appear
between the verb and the subject pronouns. If the subject

is third person, the question particle will appear after

the s.

Ze Possessive Pronouns.
a) na-mén "my father’
b) = 2an-tén ‘your mother!
c) nene-s "his child!

d) sq’emay?-1 ‘our dog'

--- Page 23 ---
16

The possessive pronouns are attached to the noun they
modify. We have been using a hyphen to indicate this attach-
ment. The first person singular pronoun ne- and the second
person pronoun *en- are attached to the front of (prefixed
to) their noun. The first person pronoun -J, and the third
person pronoun -s are attached to the end of (suffixed to)
their noun.
or Refinements of simple Lummi sentences.

a) ?u? xéit-sen co sway?qa?

‘I know the man.'

“so sJeni?

b)  ?u? 1én-nax"-sx
"You caught a glimpse of the woman.'

c) 74? leni-t-son ca swi?qd?al
"I am looking at the boy.'

The initial elements, ?u?, and ?i? are aspect markers
in Lummi, and they are extremely difficult to assign English
meanings to. The particle ?i?,which is identical in form to
the Lummiword for'and',may in fact be the same word. When
used with sentences it may be indicating that the sentence
is related 'simultaneously' to some other event. The Fi?
may require that the following sentences be connected with
some other event (either stated or unstated). For example,
in the sentence ?i? len-i-t-sen k” s5-i-Sot-n-s  'I am
looking at the man as he is walking by' the initial ?i?

could well be indicating that the 'man walking by' is

--- Page 24 ---
17

connected with 'my seeing him'. The ?i? also appears to
strengthen the force of a statement. The expression ?i?
Sat-n means 'he's (really) walking (and not crawling)’.
The Sat-n by itself simply means ‘he's walking’.

The ?u? particle is much more difficult to understand
although it appears very frequently in Lummi sentences. It
also appears to have a linking function like ?i?. It may
be used to indicate that there is a causal or temporal re-
lation between two events. ?u? xéit-soen meaning 'I know
it' may be implying 'I know it (for some reason)’. The
actual meaning of this particle is an excellent topic for
future investigation.

Additional Vocabulary

a) sténox ‘salmon (or fish in general)'

b) Pinas ‘grandchild’

 

c)  sile ‘grandparent’

 

d) 2o?maq ‘great grandparent, great grandchild’

 

e) elan ‘house!

£) séerEa ‘friend, relative’
g) k“anat 'to take something’
h) = séles "hand!

i) sxéno ‘leg, foot'

3) t’elaw? ‘arm!

The word 26?maq” is used for both great grandparent and great
grandchild. it is common in languages to have terms meaning

‘two generations, or three generations distant'. Note that

--- Page 25 ---
18

English uses the word grand- which expresses the relation

‘two generations apart (and directly related)’.

4.

Translate the following sentences into English.

a)
b)
c)

a)
e)

ye?-a-sx", no-2dmoq™?

k“an-at-sen ca sténex™

len-it-son co ?en-sila (note that the particle
appears with possessive
pronoun in Lummi)

xéit-s-a ca stéte-s?

PB
k“an-at-a-sx” ca ns-sqvemdy?

Translate the following sentences into Lummi.

a)

b)
c)
da)
e)

I accidentally hit my hand.

Do you know my younger brother?
Are we taking the flounder?
Are you looking at our house?

I caught a glimpse of her leg.

--- Page 26 ---
19
Chapter 4
Adjectives
1. Adjectives.

a) heyi cea swday?qo? 'The man is big.'!
big the man

b) galilen co sndce-s 'His wife is old.'
old wife-his

c) mamimen co swi?qo?al 'The boy is small.'
small the boy

d)  ?ay? sa seni? 'The woman is good.'

good the woman

e) sxes ceo ne-Semen "My enemy is bad.’

bad the my enemy

Lummi adjectives frequently occur at the beginning of
sentences. In this way (and other ways to be discussed
below) they are acting like verbs. This order of words
may appear odd to a speaker of English, but it must be re-
membered that this strangeness only results because of the
difference from English. After you learn more Lummi, the
sentences given above will begin to seem very natural to
you.

These sentences also reflect the fact that Lummi,
like many of the world's languages, does not use a verb
meaning ‘to be'.

The Lummi word for wife (sno¢e?) is related to the
counting system. The word for 'one' is neca?, and one
(or another) person is noce?. Thus a wife is viewed as

"the other one".

--- Page 27 ---
20

Counting in Lummi

 

 

naca? "one!

é3sa "two!

Liwx™ ‘three!

jos 'four'
?

Lqets ‘five’
t?xan "six!

?

co?k™s "seven'

te?ss ‘eight’

takYx" ave

26 ' t
open ten

The Lummi numbers may seem complicated at first, but
that is only because they use a lot of the sounds not
found in English. With a little practice they will seem

easier.

Zz. More on the use of pronouns.

We have already discussed the use of the pronouns
son, sx", zi and -s in the second chapter. There is a
refinement in the use of the 3rd person pronoun which
can be discussed now.

a) len-i-t-sen ca sway?qa? ‘I see the man.'

b) len-i-t-sx" co swoy?qa? ‘You see the man.'
c) xtit-J ca swey?qe? ‘We know the man.'
d) k“Snat-s "He is taking it.'

e) len-i-t-s ca sway?qes? 'He is looking at the man.'

--- Page 28 ---
21

Sentence (e) has the English translation 'He (or she
or it) is looking at the man'. We stated earlier that
the -s element was used whenever the subject was 3rd per-
son. An example from the second chapter was xtit-s ca

swi?qo?el so sway?qa? 'The boy knows the man’.

or Consider now the following sentences.
£) ye?-san 'T go.!
g) ye?-sx" "You go.'
h)  ye?-2 'We go.!
i) ye? "He/She/It goes.!

j) ye? ca sway?qa? 'The man is going.'

In sentences (i) and (j) although the subject is third
person, no -s marking that the subject is third person
occurs. In fact, it is not allowed to appear. A sentence
such as *ye?-s ca sway?qa? sounds bad to a Lummi speaker
much as *he go sounds bad to a speaker of standard English.

The difference between the sentences (a-e) as opposed
to (f-j) is that the verbs in the first group (a-e) are
transitive and the verbs in the second group (f-j) are
intransitive. A transitive verb is one which can have
an object. In the case of 'see', one can see something.

In the case of 'go', one cannot 'go' anything, and thus
it is not possible to transfer the action of 'go' onto
another object. (It is therefore 'Intransitive'’.) Just

remember, if the verb cannot take an object, then the

--- Page 29 ---
22

third person element s does not appear. For the most part,
you can use your knowledge of English to help you here.

The verb meaning 'to come' is ?ané?. The verb is intran-
sitive, so to translate "The man is coming", you would

write ?ene? ca sway?qea?.

4. Translate the following sentences into English.
a) ye? co hayi swi?qo?aZ
b) momiman co q”’oq’si? (young) slento?al
c) Jay? sa sleni? 71? sxes ca sway?qa?

d) x€éit-son ?opan séetea?

e) és$-t-o-sx” co momimon nana? 2?
are Translate the following sentences from English into
Lummi.

a) Are you coming?

b) The old man and the young (see section 4) woman
are going.

c) He is taking the three salmon.

d) He is old.

e) We (accidently) hit the small dog. (Later we will

learn another way to say ‘small dog' in chapter 15.)

--- Page 30 ---
23
Chapter 5

Predicate Tenses

1. The past and future tenses.
a) len-i-t-le-san ca ge?ni?
'I was looking at the girl.'
b) len-i-t-sa-sen ca de?ni?
‘I will look at the girl.'
c) ?ay?-la ca sway?qo?
'The man was good.'
d) ?ay?-so-san
"I will be good.'
e) ?ene?-lse ca sway?qa?
‘The man came.'

The past tense is indicated by the presence of the
suffix -la. It is attached onto the end of the verb, and
appears before any subject pronouns. Many languages do not
have a past tense marker (Chinese being an example). Lummi
frequently will leave it out. Whether the sentence refers
to the present or past will be determined by context. That
is, if the speaker is talking about something that obviously
happened in the past, the past tense marker is not necessary.
The future tense with sa corresponds to English sentence
which have the helping verb ‘will’.

The suffix -la also has another interesting use. When
placed on a proper noun it indicates that the person is

deceased, The phrase ne-men-la means 'my late father’.

os The numbers 11-20

11 is ?opanicanete?

--- Page 31 ---
24

12 is ?openiceéesa

13 is ?opanicayiwx”

14 is ?opeanicanos

15 is ?openicelgets

16 is ?openicat’xan

17 is ?opaniceto?k"s

18 is ?opaniceate?ss

19 is ?opanicatak"x™

20 is cax"k%Ss

The numbers 11-19 are transparent once one knows the
numbers 1-10. The number '1l1' is rendered in Lummi by ‘ten!
and 'one'. The -ics- sequence is a combination of ‘and’
?i? and 'the' ca. Lummi forms its numerals in a manner sim-
ilar to the Spanish numerals 16-19. ‘'Sixteen' in Spanish

is dies y seis which translated literally means ten (dies)

 

 

and (y) six (seis). The word for twenty (¢ex"k"8s) appears

to bear little relation to the word for two (sa).

Te The nominalizing prefix s-.
Predicate Noun
a) ?iten 'to eat' b) s-?izen 'food'
c) nop-t 'to advise' d) s-ne "advice!
e) xed 'be sick' £)  s-xel ‘sickness’

Many predicates can be turned into nouns by an s-
prefix. The s- prefix corresponds in many ways to the
English suffix -ing. A verb such as ‘eat' can be turned
into a noun by the addition of an -ing to form ‘eating' as

in 'the eating of the salmon'.

--- Page 32 ---
25

There is an important verb in Lummi which has the Be
prefix.
g) na-s-+i? ca sway?qa?
my-liking the man
'I like the man.'
h) s-%i?-s sa sLéni?
liking-his the woman
"He likes the woman.’
This predicate s-xi? which means 'to like, love or want!
has the form of a noun. When used as predicate, however,
the s- prefix must be present, and requires that subject
pronouns be realized as possessive pronouns. Thus to say
"I like' you have to use a form which appears to be 'my
liking' (na-shi?). However, for a Lummi speaker the form
na-sti? is natural and is best rendered as 'I like! (or
‘I want', or 'I love', etc.).

Additional Vocabulary.

a) Paltelnax” ‘people (native American)'

b) = x“anitom "white man'

c)  swiw?las ‘young boy'

d)  staci?é1?7Z "child!

e) 23akMiyaq™ ‘great-great grandparent, or
great-great grandchild'

f) sq“oni? "head!

g) si?éten ‘hair'

h)  g8len teye!

--- Page 33 ---
26

i) naqsan ‘nose!
j)  sosen ‘month!

4. Translate the following Lummi sentences into English.
a) heyi-sa ca na-nane?

b) 2ay?-sa co ?an-s-?idan
c) s-ii?-1 co s-neap-s
d)  xtit-le-sen ca ?an-?3k“iyaq’-la

’ oe 4
e) xeaz-la ca cax"kYas swiw?les

5. Translate the following English sentences into Lummi.
1) My late mother was good, and my offspring will be
good.
2) Fifteen boys came.
3) He liked the native American people.
4) Eighteen white people came.
5) *We will see the child.

*Note the sequence sa-Z turns into Jeo-].

--- Page 34 ---
27
Chapter 6

Verbal Objects

1. Pronominal objects.
a) len-n-dnas-san 'I caught a glimpse of you.!
b) len-n-dnas-sx™ "You caught a glimpse of me.'
c) len-nax“-san "I caught a glimpse of it.'!
d) len-t-i-s-sen ‘I am looking at you.'
e)  len-t-i-s-sx” ‘You are looking at me.'

The above sentences exhibit several new features of Lummi.
In sentence a), the n following the root len- is a short-
ened form of nax“. The nex” appears as n when ever it
appears before certain suffixes, such as -onas. The form
-ones itself can mean either 'you or me'. When the subject
pronoun is sx" 'you', -onas means 'me'. When the subject
pronoun is -san 'I' the -onas translates as 'you'. For
the meaning 'you see you', or ‘you see yourself', Lummi
uses a different form of the ojbect pronoun called the
reflexive. We will discuss this construction in a later
chapter.

In sentence c) we observe that third person object
pronouns are not expressed. Thus when a Lummi speaker
says 'I see it' the 'it' does not appear in the Lummi
sentence. It is understood. Sentence c) can mean then,
‘I caught a glimpse of him', or 'I caught a glimpse of
something'.

Sentences d) and e) exhibit a couple of complications.

In Chapter 2, the verb len-i-t ‘to look at' was introduced.

--- Page 35 ---
28

If we followed the rules used to form sentence a), we
would expect *len-i-t-onas-sen to appear. However,
whenever -i- and -ones appear together, the -onas is short-

ened to -s-. Also, the t and the i switch positions.

0 Adverbs.
a) yos-sen ?u? nep-t ca swey?qge?
‘I always advise the man.'
b) yos-a-sx” ?u? nap-t ca sway?qa?
"Are you always advising the man?!
c) yos-Z ?u? nep-t ca swi?go?al
‘We are always advising the boy.'
dj) yos-le ?u? nap-t sa sfeni?
"He always advised the woman.’

Adverbs in Lummi sentences are usually in sentence
initial position. Items in the first position in the sen-
tence will have the question marker, the subject pronouns
and tense markers (-la and -sea) attached. We have already
seen in Chapter 4, that adjectives which occur in sentence
initial position will have subject pronouns and tense
markers. It is a general feature of Lummi, then, that when
elements such as verbs, adjectives, adverbs, or nouns are
in sentence initial position any tense markers, or subject
pronouns will be attached to this initial item. There is
one important exception to this. The third person pronoun
only appears on transitive verbs. Thus, it will not appear

on nouns, adjectives, or adverbs. In sentence d) above,

--- Page 36 ---
29

then, the third person is understood if no other subject

pronoun is present.

os Additional Vocabulary.

a) del "also, too' Adverb, patterns like yos-.
b) si?itu ‘really, extremely' Adverb
c) tu ‘still’ Adverb (e.g. tu ?omne-? ‘They're
still playing.')
d) naqix "black!
e) paq ‘white!
f) nesaq™ ‘red!
g) naq’3y ‘yellow!
h)  nahdz 'green'
i)  %iye?oles "blue!
4. Translate the following Lummi sentences into English.
a) x€it-dnas-sen
b) és5-t-onas-la-sx™
c) iel-se-san ?u? ye?
d) yos ?u? ye? ca swey?qe?
€)  len-nex“-sen ca nagqix sqvamay?
f)  pag-le co heyi pi

5. Translate the following English sentences into Lummi.

a)
b)
c)

I always catch a glimpse of the child.
I'm going too!

I looked at you.(-ls is inserted just before
subject pronoun)

--- Page 37 ---
30

d) Are you still eating?
e) Is it red?

f) Are you always looking at me?

--- Page 38 ---
31
Chapter 7
Dependent Clauses

4 a nt ay
stik“an: tetal-sen, si?em, ne-sets

sets: si?it-sen ?7u? hilekY kY na-s-len-n-dnas, na-stik”ean

 

4 Mia <
stik“an: 4Ael-san ?u? hilek”

sets: ?as-x“en-é-n co ?en-men 2?

 

stik“an: ?u? ?eskodem co ne-men

sets: ?u? hilek”-sen k” s-?os-Adiom ca na-men

 

Translation

Nephew: I'm here, uncle.

Uncle: I'm truly happy to see you, my nephew.
Nephew: I'm happy too.

Uncle: How's your father?

Nephew: My father is well.

Uncle: I'm happy you're father is doing well.

NOTES: (a) The greeting tetéel-sen 'I've arrived' is a

 

very common greeting in Lummi. The other may then answer
tetéelsx” ‘you've arrived’.

(b) The word si?ém , a word indicating deep
respect, is inserted often into Lummi sentences.

(c) The type of sentence used in the Uncle's

first statement is discussed in the next section.

--- Page 39 ---
32

1. Sentences with k“-clauses.
a) xéit-sen k” ?an-s-len-nex” ca sway?qa?
'I know that you caught a glimpse of the man.'
b) = x€it-sx“ kY s-xéit-1 ca swoy?qe?
"You know that we know the man.'
c) x€it-san k“ s-ye? co sway?qa?
'I know that the man came.'
d) xéit sa sféni? k” ne-s-?ané?

'The woman knows that I am coming.'

The sentences in (1) exhibit the most common type of
subordinate structure in Lummi--the k“-clause. The kY-
clause is very similar to the type of construction in Eng-
lish in which that precedes a sentence, For example, in
sentence (la) the sequence that you caught a glimpse of the
man is a subordinate clause, and the that is a subordinator
(or subordinating conjunction). Another feature of the
Lummi subordinate clause is that normal subject pronouns
such as -san, sx“, etc., appear as possessive pronouns.

The predicate also has an s- prefixed on it. Thus what
would appear as len-nex”-sean in a regular (non-subordinate
sentence) becomes na-s-len-nax”, when subordinated. This
type of construction may appear foreign to you at first,

but English has a very similar construction. In the sen-

tence My liking Mary surprised Bill, the sequence My liking

--- Page 40 ---
33

Mary is the subordinate for I like Mary. The verb like
has -ing added to it (making it noun-like) and the sub-
ject is put into the possessive form, 'I' becomes 'my'.
Thus Lummi shares some important structural features with

English in regard to sentence subordination.

re Numbers.

éax“kYasicansca? "twentyone!
1x"183? ‘thirty!
nas13s 'forty'
1g&183? ‘fifty!
t’xomZ$a? "sixty'
Ga2k"Z335? 'seventy'
te?s183 ‘eighty'
takYx"733? "ninety'
netawot ‘one hundred!

For the numbers twenty one to twenty nine, one uses a com-
: : A -
bination of numbers, We've already had twenty Cax“k“ 3s,

and to this is added the sequence icanSts, the latter

meaning ‘and one'. Thus the sequence cax"k"asicandste?
means ‘twenty and one'. The numbers 30 through 90 show a

relationship to the numbers 3 through 9. All of the
'tens' from thirty to ninety end in -188. To make the

number sixty six, combine 'sixty' t’xemZ$3? with icet’xan

--- Page 41 ---
34

‘and six! giving t’xemJSoa?icat’xan.

oc Locative adverbs.
a) le? ca sway?qa?
'The man is there.'
b) 2ele? ca na-ten

‘My mother is here.’

4. Translate the following sentences from Lummi into
English.
a) xéit-7 k“ ?en-s-len-nex” ca swey?qa?

b) = si?it-e-sx“” ?u? hilekY k” na-s-?eLa? ?

c) ?as-xYen-@-4-sx“ , si?em ?
d) le? ca hayi stenex™

e) ?as-hohom-a co na-tén ?

3. Translate the following sentences from English into
Lummi.

a) You've arrived, my nephew.

b) I am here, my uncle.

c) It is good that you are here. (Begin ?ay? k*...)
d) We are happy that you came.

e) Is it good that sq“to? (Raven) is happy?

--- Page 42 ---
35
Chapter 8
Negative Sentences

Sq“to?: %astonat-sa-sx” k“k“Syales, si?ém 2
Wis: yé?-se-sen de x“otqem, si?em
Sq“to?: hé?éte-sa-san 71? ye? el

Wis: ?alq3la-sa-sen kY na-s?izen

Ss)
3 2 . 2
Sq“to?: héyk“atea, si?ém

Wis: hoyak™

Translation
SQ“to?: What will you do tomorrow, sir?
Wis: I'm going to Bellingham.
S4“to?: I might go too.
Wis: I'm going to buy my food.
Sq“to?: Goodbye, sir.

Wis: Goodbye.

The most common Lummi word for goodbye is héyk”éa. One

replies hoy?ak”.

Xe Negation.
a) ?aw?-sen k“ s-len-nex“ ca kYalSén
b) ®ew?-san len-nex” ca kYalSén
c) 2ew? k" na-s-len-nex” co kYelgén

The sentences a-c all mean 'I don't (or can't) see

--- Page 43 ---
36

Mt. Baker'. The most common type of negative sentence in
Lummi is introduced with the element *aw?. Sentence (1b)
is a shortened version of sentence (la). In other words,
negative sentences in Lummi usually contain subordinate
clauses. A rough English translation of (la) would be:
"It is not the case for me that (my) seeing Mt. Baker
occurs". There is a subtle difference in meaning between
(la) and (1c). Sentence (la) emphasizes that 'I' can't
see the mountain. There may be a tree in the way, or I'm
not in the right position. Sentence (lc) suggests that
it is generally not the case that 'I' can't see the moun-
tain. Maybe it is cloudy. Thus in sentence (ic) there is
less emphasis on the role of the first person subject.
Lummi has a lot of subtle things like this, and learning
these points takes a lot of work.

There is another point which causes some confusion
to beginning students of Lummi. Note the following pair
of sentences.

d) ?ew? sxéit-s sa seni?

 

'The woman doesn't know it.'

e) ?aw? s-xéit so seni?
S-xc1t sea sfeni’

 

"Someone doesn't know the woman.'

f) aw? s-x€it-s co sway?qa? sa sleni?

In these negative sentences with 3rd person subjects,

--- Page 44 ---
37

if there is an s on the predicate, then the following noun
is the subject. If there is no s, then the following noun
is object. If there is an s, and two nouns follow, the
noun immediately following the predicate is usually the
subject. Lummi does allow some freedom of word order if
the context is clear. Thus, sentence might also mean 'The
woman doesn't know the man'.

The word k“elSén is interesting. Many people in
Bellingham (including the United States Forest Service)
think that kYal3én means ‘great, white watcher’. The
word is made up of two parts k“3la$ and -en. k“alas

means to shoot or strike a sharp blow, and -en means ‘a

place'. Thus, the combination k”alSén means ‘the
place where a blow was struck. The name originated

after Mt. Baker erupted in the middle of the 19th century.
After a particularly severe thunderstorm, Mt. Baker was
smoking, thus it appeared that lighting had struck the

mountain, causing it to erupt.

Zs Another negative construction.
a) ?3wene ?an-smaéqon
"You're crazy!' (You don'to have a brain.)
b) Swans spto?

'There aren't any baskets.'

--- Page 45 ---
38

c) ?3awene no-stenax”
'I don't have any fish.'
The expression ?4wana means ‘There isn't or aren't
any .. .'. Thus, a sentence such as (lc) would roughly
translate as "There aren't any my fish", but the best

English for it is I don't have any fish'.

3. Plurals.

Earlier we stated that Lummi does not normally overtly
pluralize its nouns. Thus, ca sway?qa? might mean 'the
man' or 'the men'. When it is necessary to show plurality,
Lummi nouns can undergo a process called reduplication.
Reduplication simply means that the first part of the word
is copied and added to the front of the word. Thus a word
such as sila becomes silsile?. The first i is reduced
(becomes 9) so the plural of grandparent silo? is salsila?.
Another way that plurality can be indicated is by insert-
ing a -e9l- inside the word after the first consonant.
Thus, ¢isten 'antler' becomes ¢alistan. The process of
plural formations is quite complicated. Some examples
are listed below. Another way to form a plural is to
insert an -i- after the first consonant in the word. An
example of this is siwsy?qa 'men' from swey?qo? ‘man’.
Words fall into various classes depending on which way

they form their plural. This situation for plural formation

--- Page 46 ---
39

in Lummi is similar to the situation in English in that

the word child must be pluralized as children, the word

man becomes men, and goat becomes goats.

 

 

4. Translate the following Lummi sentences into English.
a) ?aw? kY ?an-s-len-i-t ca swi?qo?az
b) ?ewana smatgen-s ca siway?qa?
c) *?aw?-2 k” s?onat (give) ca sway?qa? a ca
s€enax”
d)  ?aw-la-sean len-i-t
e) ?aw? k“ s-lenit ca sway?qe?
f) aw? kY s-lenit-s ca sway?qa?

 

*The part a ca stenex” indicates the thing which is

given.

Ss. Translate the following English sentences into Lummi.

a)
b)
c)
a)
e)

We didn't eat the sea urchins (sk*iéi).
We don't have any baskets.

My grandparents aren't coming.

The man doesn't see the woman.

I don't want it.

--- Page 47 ---
40

Chapter 9
The Passive Voice

Pinas: tétal-sen, si?ém, ne-sila, ?i? si?it-sen

2u? éi?us
sile?: 2007, hilek’-sen kY no-s-len-n-onas, no-?inas
?inas: 2as-x“an-é@-n-le k” s?alelex“-la ?
sile?: 24y?-1e 2ax“ilnax". ?ew-le-s-k“an-n-i-t-p

a KY wet
?inas: estit-n-la Pal Eey-s

sile?: hdo?-la ey? 271? si?it-la ?%u? astit-n

Translation.
Grandchild: I have arrived, my grandfather, and I am
really tired.
Grandfather: Oh, I'm happy to see you, my grandson.
Grandchild: What were the old people like?
Grandfather: The people were good. They were not
helped by anybody.
Grandchild: Did they work hard?
Grandfather: Whenever they worked, they really worked

hard.

Passives.
a) len-t-i-n a co swey?qo?

'The man saw it.'

--- Page 48 ---
41

b) len-t-i-n-sen 2a ca swey?qa?

'The man saw me.' or 'I was seen by the man.'

c) 1én-n-n-sen a ca sway?qa?

'The man caught a glimpse of me.' or 'I was spotted
by the man.!

The sentences in (1) are examples of a grammatical
structure which corresponds closely to the English passive
construction. The passive in English is a sentence such
as 'I was hit by the man'. The term 'passive' is used
because the subject will frequently have a 'passive' role
in the action being described. The sentence 'The man hit
me’ expresses action on the part of the subject, 'the man'.
Thus, the sentences 'I was hit by the man' and 'the man
hit me' are semantically related in that both are descrip-
tions of the same event. In English, every transitive
sentence has a passive counter part, and vice-versa. This
is not the case in Lummi. For some sentences, Lummi can
only have the 'passive form'. Sentence (la) is an example
of this type. The hypothetical active counterpart of this
sentence should be xtit ca sway?qa? 'The man knows it' be-
cause the 3rd person object is never expressed. The sen-
tence xéit ca sway?qa? does not mean 'The man knows it’.

It means 'know the man!', an imperative sentence where the
subject is an understood 'you'. The only way to render

‘The man knows it' in Lummi is with sentence (la), which

--- Page 49 ---
42

is like 'It is known by the man'. Another way to say it
then, is that when the object is a 3rd person pronoun,
Lummi requires the passive-type construction.

The passive is formed by adding either t or nax™ (-n-)
to the verb stem, followed by the suffix -n. The t

and nex“ carry their usual meaning.

2. Prepositions.
a) sil-n-le 2 co sol
'He was standing on the road.'
b) ®asnowel-le 2 ca Velen
"He was in(side) the side.’
c) ?u? ye? seq”
‘He ran through it.'
ad) da&Siawal
‘It's underneath.'
e) ?asté?ta 9 co pict
"He's sitting (lying) on the bed.'

Lummi does not have prepositions of the type found in
English. Many of the ideas conveyed by prepositions in
English, are conveyed by full predicates in Lummi. In
English one might say 'The rabbit ran through the fence’,
in Lummi one has to break this into two parts: ?i?
kYen-i-n-t co hopit, ye? ?u? sJaqg*st a qelexen, 'As

the rabbit was running, it went through the fence’. The

--- Page 50 ---
43

essential idea here is that Lummi prepositions usually act

as predicates.

The expression newal ‘in(side)' should be

treated as a predicate meaning 'to be inside’.

The particle a does function occasionally as a uni-

versal preposition.

We saw it being used to mean 'by' in

the passive construction discussed in the previous section.

In sentence (2a), it is best translated as 'on'.

In sen-

tences (2b) it is rendered best by English 'in'.

sn More predicates.

a) Jamx* ‘It's raining.'
b)  éamonest-sen 'I'm getting wet.'
c) C1?x"-n-sa 'It will be cold.’ (about weather)
d) ¢6?1-n-san 'I'm cold.'!
e) gen-n ‘I'm shivering.'
£) sex“-sx” "You're lazy.!
g) tal-n-dnat-sx" 'T understand it.'
h) tog“-n-sen 'I'm coughing.’ (used for 'I have a cold.
i} Ligat ‘Cut it.!
j) qeéy?les 'He is sad.'
4. Translate the following sentence from Lummi into English.
a) x€t-i-n-sen a ca sway?qa?
b) Yit-nax"-le-sean ca ne-séles
c) tal-n-dnat-s-sx” co x“lumitosen ? (x“lumigésen =

 

 

the Lummi language)

--- Page 51 ---
44

d) ?asteta? a ca snax"Z

e)  yos-sx“ ?u? éo?I-5

Translate the following into Lummi.

a) It's raining and I'm getting wet.

b) We were seen by the enemy.

c) He was sitting on the table (sx“?izen).

d) He came from (ta) Bellingham and I'm going to (he)
Bellingham.

e) We saw it.

--- Page 52 ---
45

Chapter 10

Interrogative Pronouns and niJ-sentences
Wis: teéal’sean, sivém
Sq“to?: teal-sx“, si?ém

Wis: t’ot’ast-san k” na-s-xel-éls 2a tite x“lumigosen

 

Sq“to?: ?astewet-a-sx™ kY ?sn-s-tel-n-onst @ ca s-xel-éls
w sy fo,
2 ca x“lumicosen
Wis: ?u? tal-n-onet-sen 9 ca s-xal-els @ ca x“lumifosen

SQ’to?: ?ay?, si?ém. hoyk“ée

Wis: hoyak”, si?ém

Translation.
Wis: I've arrived, sir.
Raven: You've arrived.
Wis: I'm learning to write the Lummi language.
Raven: Can you read (understand written) Lummi?
Wis: I can read (understand written) Lummi.
Raven: That's good, sir. Goodbye.

Wis: Goodbye.

sm Questions with interrogative pronouns.
a) wet k“ len-neax” ca sway?qa? ?

‘Who sees the man?’
b) wet k" len-n-as ca sway?ga? ?

'Who does the man see?'

--- Page 53 ---
46

c) wet kY len-t-i-n ?
‘Who am I looking at?!
d) wet kY len-t-i-x“ ?
‘Who are you looking at?'
e) wet k” len-t-i-s ?

'Who is he looking at?'

£) sten k” an-s-hi2 2

 

‘What do you want?!

The Lummi word for 'who' is wet and for 'what' is sten.
As is the case in English the question word comes first,
but unlike English, the Lummi interrogatives have many of
the features of predicates. For example, the 'rest' of
the sentence that follows occurs is a subordinate clause
introduced by the k“ marker. The Lummi sentences with the
interrogative markers wet and sten come closest to English
sentences such as "Who is it such that he sees the man?".
This translation would fit sentence (la). The appearance
of the 3rd person subject s marker follows the pattern found
in subordinate clauses. If there is an -s on the verb,
the following noun is the subject (cf. sentence lb). If
there is no -s on the verb, the following noun is the object
(cf. sentence la).

The sentences (lc) and (1d) add a new wrinkle. In-
stead of the normal possessive pronoun markers ne- and

?an-, the reduced forms -n (from -san) and x” (from -sx")

--- Page 54 ---
47

are used. These reduced pronouns occur in the suffix

position where subject Pronouns are normally found.

(30 niZ- sentences.

a) nil ca swoy?qe?
'That's the man.'!

b}  nil-le sa sléni?
'That was the woman.'!

c) nif-le heyi s-tey?-s @ ca heyi gx“ak"Z
‘That was a big job on the big canoe.!

d) nij-lea k” na-s-ye?
'Then I went.'!

The nid sentences are among the most important struc-
tural types in Lummi, Since they are used very frequently.
In sentence (2d) one of the most frequently idiomatic uses
of nil is demonstrated when nij introduces a subordinate
clause (e.g. nif k™“ s-Verb...), the sequence nid k* s-
is frequently translated into English as 'then'. A rough
English translation of (2nd) is 'It was that I went'. This

translation begins to get close to the meaning 'Then I went’.

ites Relative clauses.
a) nid ti?a swey?qa? k¥ len-i-t

'That's the man that sees it.!

--- Page 55 ---
48

b) nid ti?e swey?qa? len-i-t-s
'That's the man that he sees.'

c) niZ ti?e sway?qa? len-t-i-n
‘That's the man I saw.'

d) x€it-sen ca sway?qe? kY¥ len-i-t
'I know the man that saw it.

e) x€it-san ca sway?qo? kY len-i-t-s
‘I know the man that he knows.'!

f) tu hek¥ ca sway?qa? k* ne-s-len-n-n
‘He still remembers the man that saw me.'

g) nid ca sway?qe? xot-n-onas
‘That's the man that knows me.'

These sentences will give the reader a taste of the
variety of possibilities for expression that are available
in Lummi. They will also give the reader an indication
of the structural complexity which can be found in Lummi.
Sentences (3a-c) demonstrate how predicates next to nouns
can be attributive in their function. The predicate
len-i-t by itself means '(you) watch it’, but when next
to the noun ti?a sway?qa?, it means ‘that sees it’. In
this position it is a relative clause. The form that the
subject pronouns take in these constructions is the re-
duced variety discussed in section 1 of this chapter.

Sentence (1d) is an example of another type of rela-

tive clause construction. This sentence has a kY (that)

--- Page 56 ---
49

present. As was the case with earlier kY sentences,
subject pronouns are found in their possessive form.

An example of this is sentence (3f). Sentence (3f) is
especially interesting because the subordinate sentence
has a passive verb len-n-n 'to be seen'. Thus, another
English translation could be ‘that's the man I was seen
by'. Thus the sequence len-n-n-San becomes ne-s-len-n-n
when it occurs in a subordinate clause.

Instead of the passive form, it is possible for the
first person to appear as an object pronoun. This is
demonstrated in (3g). Actually sentence (eg) is ambiguous
and could mean ‘that's the man that knows you'. The ambi-
quity in ones may be why Lummi speakers prefer structures

such as (3f) where the subject pronoun is unambiguous.

4. Translate the following sentences from Lummi into
English.

a) t’ot’ast-san a ca x“lumitosen

b) wet k“ len-nax"-Z

c) sten k” ?an-s-ifan ?

4) ni ca heyi swey?qe? k“ ne-s-Ai?

e) nif-a sa sfeni? kY an-s-lén-t-p

oe Translate the following sentences from English into Lummi.

a) That's the man who knows me.

--- Page 57 ---
b)
c)
a)
e)

50

Are you learning to read the Lummi language?
Who do you like?
What do they want?

That was a big salmon.

--- Page 58 ---
51
Chapter 11

"How The Lummi People Came To Their Present Location
And How They Got Their Name"

The following is a brief history of the Lummi people.
-It combines a shortened version of the Sxeloqst story with
the story about the origin of the name 'Lummi'. The text
also tells about the relationship of the Lummi language to

surrounding native American languages.

1. te? 25? a ca swelox "ca swi?qoal ?i?
is There reportedly on Orcas Island (was) a young man and
lone pronounciation of this word is [1#?]. Our ortho-

graphy is essentially phonemic and is consistent with the
Straits Salish orthography used, by the Thompsons (Lawrence
C. Thompson and M. Terry Thompson, "Clallam: A Preview", in
Studies in American Indian Languages, ed. Jesse Sawyer, Uni-
versity of California Publications, no. 65 (Berkeley: Uni-
versity of California Press, 1971) pp. 251-94) and Efrat
(Barbara Efrat, "A Grammar of Non-Particles in Sooke, a Dia-
lect of Straits Coast Salish" (Ph.D. diss., University of
Pennsylvania, 1969). The phoneme /e/ is usually pronounced
{#], /o/ is [5], and /i/ varies between [i] and [e], but is
usually the lower variant. Rounded consonants (e.g. q", k“)
and palatal consonants (e.g. y, €) have an effect on vowels,
especially in unstressed position. We have ignored these
effects in the phonemic transcription. For a discussion of
the changes which have occurred in the pronunciation of Lummi
see Thompsons and Efrat, "Some Phonological Developments in
Straits Salish", IJAL 40.3 (1974), pp. 182-196.

2this particle will occur throughout the text and we
leave it untranslated. It is used frequently in narratives
and indicates that the speaker does not have firsthand know-
ledge of the matter being described. It corresponds to 'I
heard tell that' and does not commit the speaker to the truth
of the statement. An interesting property of Mr. Charles'
speech is his tendency to raise unstressed final eo to #
Thus Ce will frequently be heard as [Ce], ?ele will be [?2lx?}.

--- Page 59 ---
52

1. $itp ce qé?ni? Pela tite Sdaléxdn,

1. (he) desired a young lady here at S.

2. niZ s-u-malyi-t-n-s° ca x“tolem sa Gé?ni?

2 Then got married X*, to the young lady
2. 24? Piyes mok”-wet ?u? ?iyas k¥  s-k’notal-s
2. and happy (was) everybody happy that was united
2. ca x”“torem a sa gé?ni? a  sqaléxen. 3. ?i?
Oe x“, with the girl from Se . 3. And
3. aw! s-his  k“ s-?iyes 71? niz

3. (it was) not long that (they were) happy and then

Sone of the most common structures in this narrative
is the niZ k” s-u-verb sequence. nizZ has a wide range of
meaning including ‘that one’, ‘that’s it', 'it' and so
forth. The k”“ is introducing a factual clause in the sense
of Kuipers (Aert Kuipers, The Squamish Language, 1969, p. 183).
The s- has been identified as a nominalizer in other Salish
dialects (Efrat, p. 61, Kuipers, p. 66). The -u- which also
appears in this text as ?u? has been identified as a particle
meaning ‘contemporaneous’ in a dialect closely related to
Lummi. (Efrat, p. 38) Mr. Charles usually translates the

underlined sequence (nil k* s-u-) as 'then'. We will follow
his translation in this text. This niJ-structure can appear

as a nil s-u- (sentence 8) or even shortened to as s-u-
(sentences 5. and 19.). See footnote 8 for more details con-

cerning nominalized verbs.

44 sentence negated with ?aw is usually followed by a
subordinated form of the main Clause. Thus we find that the
embedded predicate will take a s-prefix (the nominalizer?).
One also finds x"- or even sx“- prefixed in this position.
The pronunciation of this sequence is [aws his], but the kY
subordinator and other particles can appear between the ?ow
and the s, thus demonstrating the true nature of this con-
struction (See e.g. sentence 21. or 104.).

--- Page 60 ---
AS

3. s-u-qéqelam-s . 4. qéqealam 21? yos
ae quarreled-they. 4. (they) quarreled and (they) always
4 an? at 5 7 2 6 PA
« ué qeqalam” . S$. s-u-xen-e-t-n-s ca x“tdzam a sa
4. quarreled. 5. then was told x", by
S. sJéni?-s ay? wo2% k¥ ?an-s-yé?! tok”. 6. ye?-sx¥
5. wife-his good if you went home . 6. go-you
6. x“i?élqan ye?. 7. le?-se k“ ?an-s-?ifon
6. back 7. there-will (be) your food
7. ti2e sersdom® ttoseljox™. 8. 74? nix ts s-u-x”t&dsan-s

7. those bony animals . 8. and then answered

 

SThe third person subject pronoun is @ for intransitives
in main clauses. An '-s' can appear in subordinate clauses,
however, as is demonstrated in the preceding sentence
(s-u-qeqalem-s).

Both t and n(ex“) are suffixes which transitivize a
verb. The Thompsons use the term 'control' for the 't' to
indicate that the subject in some way influences the action of
the verb. The nex” form is weaker with respect to the involve-
ment of the agent or subject. Thus when t is added to the
verb len, the sequence len-t means 'to watch' or ‘look at’.
The sequence t or n (n is an allomorphic variant of nox)
plus n, corresponds to the English passive. Important dif-
ferences exist between this construction in Salish and the
English passive, however. (Thom Hess, "Agent in a Cost Salish
Language", IJAL 39.2 (1973), pp. 89-94.

"Certain types of subordinate sentences with pronominal
subjects cliticize the possessive form of the pronoun onto the
(nominalized) verb. Thus ?on-s-ye? is ‘your going'. The
third possessive affix follows its head noun as opposed to the
prefixal nature of the first and second person possessives.

8the word for bone is s?otem. In the text Mr. Charles
uses something like s¢?odem and translates this as bony or
'jittle-boned'. The Form s¢?o0¢am may be then a diminutive
formed by reduplication (/Sé-s?oéem/).

--- Page 61 ---
10.
10.

10.
10.

12.
12.

13.
13.

14.
14.

14.

14.

15.
is.

$4

co x*tozem. 9. xen-é-t sa sléni?-s ?ey? wore
xX". . 9, «~(he) told wife-his good I guess

k” na-s-yé? tok“ 271? 2u? ?eLo-sx” ol . 10.

if I went home and stay here-you just. 10. (there
nen? ti?e qiwx maq“-san  qiwx

are) lots (of) those steelhead fat-legged steelhead

“ : 4 9
k“ ?en-s-?izen-sa. 11. qiwx 201 k” ?an-s-?ifan’

that you eat will. 11. steelhead just that you eat.

nil @ s-u-yé?-s t’ok” co x“tdlem. 13. ?i? ?u? qiles

then went home x". 0. 0 13.0 «but became

ca x“téZam. 14. s-u-xen-é-t-s s?ey?%an-s

lonesome x”. . 14. then told-he younger brother-
ye?-san-sa ye? len-t....?i? ne?-t-s sa sléni?-s

his go-I-will go (to) see...... and (he) named wife-his

24? ?aw-san xéit k” s-ne?-s. 1S. ?i? xen-n

but not-I know what name-her (was). 15. and said

ca s?ey?can-s yé?-san-sa ?u? 717 sawé.

younger brother-his go-I-will along.

9 F
Mr. Charles says that these references to animals are

veiled insults. "It's a way of swearing at one another."
"T guess she had big legs."

--- Page 62 ---
55

16. niz to s-u-?667 @ ca snox"2-s 271? ?ane? len-t-s
16. then (he) go aboard canoe-his and came (to) see
16. sa sfeni?-s. 17. 71? tox” ta ?7u? ?esqémal
16. wife-his . 17. and (it was) just half

17. st’etn. 18. 71? ?aw s-ye? ?u? Tel ye?, ?i? Sem.
17. tide . 18. and not went (they) ashore , but went
18. 19. s-u-x3n-n-s ca x“toZem,

18. aground (on a bar). 19. then said XY,

19. ?aw-sx”su-ene? Jel . 20. ha?-so

19. not-you come ashore. 20. if (there)-will (be)

20. sk’éleq’, kY¥ %ané?-s saq ca siwdy?qa?, 21? ?ew

20. killing , when come out the men , then not

- . 3
20. s-u-ane? Jel » ye?-sx” x“i?elqen. 21. ew Ca

20. come ashore, go-you back . 21. not

21. s-ye? ?u? tas ca élan-s 3 sa sléni?-s, ?i? ?ane?

21. (he) reached the house-her of wife-his, and came

21. seq su niz. 29 22. ?i? niY s-u-?omat-s . 23. 2Oomat

21. out she . 22. and then she sat down. 23. (they)
1

Orne expression su nif indicates a feminine referent.
The masculine equivalent is cu nil.

--- Page 63 ---
56

23. 24? nig s-u-qYel-ndk“al-s./) 24, his

23. sat and then (they) talked 7 24. (it was a) long
24. k” s-q“ol-ndwal-s 71? ?ane? saq ca siwdy?qo?,
24. time that talked-they and came out the men ,
24. s?aléy?%an-s 24? co Séyal-s , sea seni?

24. younger brothers-her and older brothers-her, the wife

24. 9 xtolam. 25. nil @o s-u-q"%6t-n-s ca x“tézom.

24. of x”. . 25. then murdered-they x*~

26. 4“Eot-n . 27. s-u-yes x“i?élen co sxaldqst.
26. (he) was killed. 27. then went back Sx.

28. ye? t?ok™ 241? yas-ds-t-s co salelax’-s , sk“élaq“-s
28. (he) went home and told-he parents-his, killed-they
28. k* s-x“tolem, sk¥élaq’-s . 29. ?i? x“an-e?-n

28. the late X“.  , killed-they. 29. and was like

29. hert4 cs xaé-n-i-n a sxeloqgst. 30. ye?-sean-sa

29. this the mind of Sx. . 30. go-I-will

lthe morpheme nak“al signifies reciprocity of the action
of the verb. This morpheme also appears in the next sentence
(24) as nowal.

leone form ie? is a full pronominal form. There is an
article ha which can indicate direction (to). This same type
of full-reduced vocalic alternation is found in the definite
article ca which can appear as ce? meaning 'this one' (See
sentence 56.). We are not always certain whether the two
forms ca and ce? are variants of a single form or whether two
separate morphemes are involved.

--- Page 64 ---
30.
30.

31.

31.

33.
33.

34.

34.

35.
35.

35.
35.

36.
36.

36.
36.

$7

x“i2élqon k“Y héy-an-sal? k* na-s-k*Zost.

back when finished-I-will (with) my-training.

kY  niz te s-u-k¥%ds-t-s co sxeldqst. 32. so?k-n. 14
then trained Sx. . 32, (he)bathed.
mak™ sk“3yel kk“  (s-)so?kY-n-s. 34. ye? &laq”
(it was) every day that bathed (he) . 34. (he) went
ye? 9 ca swi?izé k¥ s-naq-n-s. 35. mak*-axin

back to the lake where dived-he . 35. every where
s-x“-le?-s kY — s-so?k*¥-n-s den a k“ %y?tan-s

(was the place that bathed-he looking for the weapon-his

k” 2?ané?-s?ané? , x“tZost. 36. niZ

when comes-he back, (there will be) revenge. 36.

to s-u-ndq-n-s le? xSm-xem-ifc —, 21? ?oné? hel
dived-he there (at) Blakely Island, and came also

a ca met’éels . 37. neg-n le? met’éls

to Point Lawrence. 37. (he) dove there (at) Point Lawrence.

13

Lummi has reduced forms of the pronominal subject en-

clitics which appear in some types of subordinate constructions.
The first person single -san will be -en as in this example.

l4one Lummi were known to bathe in the bitterly cold

waters around the San Juan Islands. Bathing was part of a
ritual purification.

--- Page 65 ---
38.

38.

39,
39.

39.
39.

40.
40.

41.
41.

43.
43.

44,
44.

45.
45.

46.
46.

58

7 fn-4u
mek“ swi?iJé ?u? naq-n-s ye? so?k¥-n-s ye?,

every lake dived-he went bathing.

-u-ye?- 25 24? 2 241? 2u? ? Zénasl°
S-u-ye?-s fo 271? ye? 271i? 2u? tas ye? a stones
then went (he) and arrived at Deception Pass
971? le? kY s-naq-n-s. 40. one? hel t*okw
and there dived-he . 40. (he) came also home (and)
s-u-Sil-n-s 93 ca swelax . 41. 217? le? k¥

climbed (he) up on Mt. Constitution. 41. and there

s-neq-n-s . 42. nil s-u-?ené? Jel. 43. hoy-s k”

dived (he). 42. then (he) came ashore . 43. finished

S-nag-n-s , Zel » 271? gqeq’-n. 44. his

(he) diving-his, came ashore, and rested. 44. a long

ge kM s-qeq“-n-s ?i? Patot-n . 45. nil
time that rested (he) and (he) felt sleepy. 45. then
s-u-2it-tt5, 46. it-t 24? q3i-qal-ésen 9
(he) fell asleep. 46. (he) slept and dreamed about
co féy?tan-s . 47. xWan-@?-n-sa Rel kY ?an-€Sy? tan.
weapon-his. 47. like this-will (be) also your weapon.

1Sthe word s€onas means ‘whirlpool’.

16nnese two final t's are both pronounced with aspiration.

There is no intervening vowel.

--- Page 66 ---
59

48. Ge&-t-sx” 1! 49. nid-so %?3wa-sx” k¥ k“fwantalex™”, 17

48. make it-you! 49. it-will use-you when fighting

50. stomeS-so-sx" . Si. nakvt8 ca stomas tia

50. warrior-will (be)-you. 51. you the warrior this

Sl. ?an-s-x“-?@f0?7 . 52. niz ta s-u-xen-n-i-kYan-s ca
Sl. your-place here. 52. then thought

“ . Ww
$2. sxaloqst ?ey? k” no-s-ye? x“téost ye? rouse

52. Sx. good I go to take revenge (on) those

52. siwdy?qa?. $3. nif éa s-u-?ane?-s. 54, ?as-net

52. men . $3. then came (he) . 54. it was night

54. k” s-?ené?-s téfal ?ané? 9 mo?mli. 55. nil

$4. when (he) arrived at M. . 55. then
2 19 2 5 va
55. S-u-naw?-i?-1-n-s aco ?elan ?i? €0k“-t-s ca
55. went inside-he the house and used-he
SS. ca @sy?ten-s . 56. hoy ce? ?i? ye? tas a ca
55. weapon-his. 56. finished he and arrived at the
1? this form appears in the text, although Mr. Charles

used k“intalex” when we were double checking the text.

18 oh form nak” is the emphatic form for 'you'.

19tnis form is related to ndwal which means ‘to be inside’.

The unstressed aw sequence becomes [u] in /naw?-1?-1-n/ =
[nu(w) e?1in].

--- Page 67 ---
60

56. nadéw?x¥?9 242 hel 2u? xan-é-t-s. 7+ 57. hoy ce?
56. next house and too did it-he. $7. finished he
57. 24? ye? tas a ca nadéw?x" . 58. 741? Pex-n de

57. and arrived at the next house. 58. and was doing this

S8. 21? tx“sey & ca ?u? hoy 2u?.27 59. 16? ca sewnen

58. until the last one. 59. there (at) the end

59. elen ?ane? saq ca ?as?élox” 7i? xen-é-t-n, lesé3n-n-sx",

59. house came out an old man and was told , help me,

59. ew s-u-€?Swas ca ?an-t3y?ten. 60. ho?-sa-sx”

59. don't use your-weapon. 60. if-will-you

60. s-x"-?aw-s, 71? nil-se7 Pan-tdnax“, tia

60. not ; then this-will (be) your land, this

20, a Wo * - 2
The form notew?x” is a compound consisting of nece
‘one', or ‘other’ and the lexical affix -ew?x“ thouse, building’.
For a discussion of the lexical affix system in Salish, see
Kuipers (p. 120).

2lone form xen-é-t-s could also mean 'he said it'. Con-
text decides whether 'say' or 'do' is meant.

2eur. Charles says the sequence ?u? hoy ?u? means ‘the
last one’.
23

It is perfectly fine in Lummi to attach the future
suffix -sa to the referential pronoun at the beginning of this
sentence.

--- Page 68 ---
60.
60.

60.
60.

61.
61.

62.
62.

63.
63.

63.
63.

64.
64.

64.
64,

64.
64,

65.
65.

61

2en-sk“e?-sa ti?a tonax”, ?en-sk"e?-sa
your possession will (be) this land , your possession-
ti2s stolew?. 61. mak”-so-sten ?u?
will (be) this river . 61. every-will thing
?an-sk“e? . 62. s-u-xdn-n-s ga ca sxaloqst,
(be your possession. 62. then said Sx. ,
20? Pey?, x“an-e?-n-sa . 63, ye?-san-so

good, like this (it)-will (be). 63. go-I-will

2 . a y
t’ok” ?i? yas-6s-t-san k“ no-?as7alélox” k” ?an-sé?onas

home and tell-I my parents that you gave

3 ti?a ?an-tanax” 71? ca ?an-stolew?.

(me) this your land and your river
s-u-ten-s ca sxaldqst, ?i? yes-os-t ca
then went home-he Sx. , and told

o . ’ -
s?alelax”-s, k“  s-ke?-s tive sqelexen,
parents-his, that possession-his S. ;
sk“e?-s ca stdlew?, sdalexen stolow?. 65. ?1i?
possession-his the river , 8. river . 65. and
niz %a s-u-qel ca s?alélax“, 71? xan-e@-t-n

then believed (him) the parents , and (they) told

--- Page 69 ---
62

65. ca sxaloqst, ?ay? wore k” s-ye?-Z% len-i-t k”

6S. Sx. , good we guess if went-we look at

65. s-?en-ténex” k” ?an-stdlaw?. 66. ?ene?-le-s Ea

6S. your-land your-river . 66. came-they

66. Jel Pane? 207, sivit ta ?u? sxeloqst.

66. ashore oh , it truly (was) Sx.

67. ?u? si?it 2u? skYe?-s ti?e tanex” 71?

67. it truly (was) possession-his this land and

67. ca stolew?. 68. nil é@a s-u-ye? s-x"i?élqan

67. the river . 68. then went (they) back

68. 24? ye? ha swélex . 69. nil éa s-u-ye?-s

68. and went to Orcas Island. 69. then went-they
i 4a. , ¥ 24 2%

69. a swelat 24? %en?e? Pan&?-t-n ca ?elalan

69. to Lopez Island and were brought the houses

69. le? sweloé. 70. ?ane?-t-n 3

69. there (at) Lopez. 70. (they) brought (them) to

70. t'émx“i?qsan . 71. le? kY ta kY s-fe-t-ns

70. Gooseberry Point. 71. there that built- they

24one verb ?ene? 'come' has been transitivized with
a t suffix to mean ‘bring’.

--- Page 70 ---
71.

71.

71.
71.

72.

72.

73.
73.

74.
74.

78.
75.

7S.
7S.

76.
76.

77.
77.

63

ca ?elaln » le? t? émx“i?qsen ésa swelat

houses-their, there at Gooseberry Point from Lopez

= a 2 2
72. 24? xYan-6?-n bo he? Pelalen,

Island. 72. and it's like this (about) the houses,

®snet a «ca x"-1e?-s. ca 0 ?élalan. 73. 74? nid

crowded at the place (of) the houses . 73. and it

4 4 , * 3
na?et-n-s x"lolomes, x"lolemes. 74. x“an~e?-n Ca?

was named X“1.0=«, X“1.  . 74. it was like

he? ca ?élalen-s. 75. ?i? ho? de saq )
this their houses . 7S. and if came out the
Pax“ilnex”, 271? lén-n-as ca ?ax“ilnex” le? ca
people ,» then saw-they the people there (at) the
nedéwx"25  . 76. nid x“-¢o-16? ca s-ne?

other house. 76. that's from where (came) the name

k“ s-nex”-lami-s, ca x“lolemos. 77. ?aw s-x“-lomi...

Lummi > XML. 0.77. not  x*-lumi
seeeee nex“lolsemes co ?élalen. 78. niz
(but)  x“lolemas (were) the houses . 78. that's

Our. Charles translates x“lolemas as 'they faced each

other' or even 'to be at right angles’. Mr. Charles explains
that the two houses were at right angles to each other,
instead of being in a straight line or parallel, as tradi-
tional.

--- Page 71 ---
78.
78.

79.
79.

80.
80.

80.

80.

80.
80.

81.

81.

81.
81.

82.

82.

83.

83.

ized

64

s-ne?-s co ?élalen, x“lodlemes. 79. 717 nil

the name of the village, x“ldlomas. 79. and that's

2 - a oa
k“ Ca s-u-?ane-t-n-s ca nax”-13mi. 80. aw s-x¥-1ldmi

the provenience of Lummi. 880.) not Lummi

s o v v
Leqomas ca s-ne?-s, ZeqomaS, ca x“-gale?-s

Jéqemes (is) their name , Léqamas, from where

26

ca s-wet°? ?ané?, x“tdlem 71? ca s?éy?can-s

the persons come , x”, and younger brother-his,

ea : 3 2
co jJeqamaS. 81. nil k" fa s-x“-Ga-1é? mak” ca

the Jéqoma$. 81. that's from where all the

Pax“ilnax” ca Léqames ?7i? ca s?emeS, swinamas
Q ’ ’ ’

people (come), the ZéqamaS and the Samish, Swinomish,

stileg’omaS , snahomes , duwamas , ssq”omes 27

Stillaguamish, Snohomish, Duawamish, Suquamish.

nil x“-Ea-le?-s ?u? ?asdlanet-s ca ?ex“ilnex™.
that's from where stemmed the people :

mak" 2u? éa-1€? » ca x“alx“3laq™ ae

everyone (is) from the people who lived through

Onere the interrogative pronoun wet has been nominai-
to mean 'person, or people’.

27 these are well-known native American groups and place

names in Washington State.

28rne word x“alx“3laq“ cannot be further analyzed. Mr.

Charles consistently translates it as 'the people who lived
through the flood’.

--- Page 72 ---
83.
83.

84,
84.

84,
84.

8s.
85.

85.
85.

86.
86.

86.
86.

86.
86.

87.
87.

88.
88.

65

sqaléxen. 84. xYen-é?-y a ie? ,

the flood at Sqalexen. 84. (it was) like this,

oF 3 . ve -
qene fa tita sttanex“en ?i? le? (9)

covered with water the earth and there (were)

stéwex co ?ax“ilnax”. 85. dana za

the raft-people - 8S. was covered with water

: 3 . . x o 2
tis sétdnex“an 27i? nid k” Ca s-u-%ey-s a ca stéwox,

this earth and then made-they a raft ,

s-x“-hal-i-s a ca hayi sqimo. 86. danas

saving-they from the big tide . 86. (the ground was)

21? nizy to s-u-xeé-n-s hel ca

covered with water and dried again the

s€tanox“en, 71? niZ s-u-ne?-t-n-s k“ s-sdewax

earth » and then called-they the raft (place)

ce? . 87. ?u? k”al his wo? sx“eyem tira,
this. 87. already long time probably story this,
sx“ayem, ?ew s-te-qayas . 88. nix wore 2u?

story , not today (it is so). 88. it's probably

x42 - 29
Calenen le? sxsloqst ca ne?-t-s"~ ca

the ancestors there (of) Sx. who named the

*9Relative clauses are usually introduced by k”, al-

though ca is not uncommon.

--- Page 73 ---
66

 

88. swi?izé 71? co skYalk"sé&?. 89. aw s-%a-qdyas ca
88. lakes and the islands . $89. not today the
89. sndnas ti?a sk“se? , ca swi?ilé, snolént ,
89. names (of) these islands, the lakes , the mountains,
89. x“-le? sxaloqst al k’%dstes . 90. sirit ca
89. where Sx. (was) when trained-he. 90. truly
90. ?u? heydm stomes , ce sxeloqst. 91. mak”-wet ?u?
90. powerful warrior, Sx. . 91. everybody
91. xéit ca sxaloqst, co s-ne?-s sxaloqst. 92. stomas
91. knows Sx. , the name Sx. . 92. (he was a)
92. 93. mok¥-wet ?u? x€it ca sxoldqst, kM
92. warrior. 93. everybody knows Sx. , that
93. s-stomos , heydm stomas . 94. s-k“al
93. (he was a) warrior, powerful warrior. 94. when
94, x€E-n-s ca sétdnex“an, s-u-ye?-s Apix-n ca ?ax“ilnex”.
94. dried the earth » then went scattered the people
95. ?u? ne?-t-san, né?-t-la-sen ce ye?-s tal-t3s ye?
95. I name » named-T those who went
Ye 30 : a 9 2 Ww . w

95. waq”ilen™~, ni? ca teyal ye?. 96. ho?-sx” len-nax
95. south » some went north. 96. if-you see

50th e expression woq“iln, here meaning 'south', can
also mean downstream. likewise, teyol can mean 'north' or

‘upstream’.

--- Page 74 ---
96. ca ?an-stéeto 24? niZ $-u-x8n-n-s, éa-1é?-san

96. your-friend and then say-he » from there

96. sx“alx"alaq” nil

96. (am)-I the people who lived throughthe flood that's

96. na-x"-Za-le? . 97. 07, sitém hél-son ?7u? Esa

96. where I'm from. 97. oh, sir also-I from

97. sx“alx“3leq” » xen-n ca
97. the people who lived through the flood, says

97. ?an-séeéa , ?aL len-n-ax” 31 98. ye?-sx” 71?

97. your-friend, when see (him)-you. 98. go-you and

98. ye? tas a duwomed , soq’omo$ , ?i? niZ s-u-x5n-n-s

98. arrive at Duwamish, Suquamish, then says-he

98. %se xalx“Sleq’-son

98. from the people who lived through the flood (am)-1.

99. sa elo tira 2ax“ilnex”, Jéqamas.
99. from here (are) these people , the Zeqamas.
100. nil x“-Ea-1e?-s . 101. 71? x¥an-e?n

100. that's from where they (are). 101. and (it's) like

31 the -ax” is a truncated form of the second person
subject enclitic pronoun. (see footnote 14)

--- Page 75 ---
101.
101.

101.
101.

102.
102.

102,
102.

102.
102.

103.
103.

68

a he? , ce sq'd-qYal-s ti?a Zéqomes x“an-é?n-se

this, the talk (of) the Jéqamas (it's) like-well

a he? » Sa-sil-n-s ca spodan-s tira Pan-sétdnox“an.

(be) this, stand up-will smoke-their (in) your land

mak”-sa-wet 2u? ho? los » ?i? niz-sa

everybody will when (they) look, and it will (be)

ca Jéqemes len-t-i-s, si?ém , si?em

the Léqame$ (that) see-they, high class, high class

Pax“ilnax”. 103. 241? Pow-tx™ , ?aw-tx” s-u-%éq

people . 103. and don't let, don't let fall

ce Penspolen?-. 104. ?aw-tx” s-u-%éq co ?an-spoien.

your smoke . 104. don't let fall your smoke.

32M, Charles explains that this expression is symbolic.

--- Page 76 ---
69

ls Out on Orcas Island there lived a young man who desired
a young lady here at Sdaleéxan. 2. When X“tolam got married
to the young lady everyone was happy that he was united to
the girl from Sqalexen. 3. But they were not happy very
long and they started to quarrel. 4. They quarreled and
were always quarreling. 5. Then X”toZem was told by his
wife, "I guess it would be good if you went home. 6. Go
back. 7. Out there all you'll have to eat are those bony
little animals." 8. And X“tdZom answered. 9. He told his
wife, "It just might be good if I did go home, you can just
stay here. 10. There are lots of steelhead, fat-legged
steelhead here that you're going to eat. 11. You only eat
steelhead." 12. So X“toZam went home. 13. But he became
lonesome. 14. Then he told his younger brother, "I am
going to go see"--and he named his wife, but I don't know
what her name was. 15. And his younger brother said, "I'll
go along.'"' 16. He boarded his canoe and went to see his
wife. 17. It was just half tide. 18. They didn't go
ashore but went aground on a sandbar. 19. Then X“toZam
said, "Don't you come ashore. 20. If there is killing when
the men come out, don't come ashore, go back." 21. He
hadn't reached his wife's house when she came out. 22. And
then she sat down. 23. They sat and talked. 24. They
talked a long time, and then came the men, the younger and

older brothers of X“tolam's wife. 25. They murdered X“toJam.

--- Page 77 ---
70

26. He was killed. 27. Then Sxaloqst went back. 28. He
went home and told his parents, "They killed X“tozem; they
killed him." 29. The thoughts of Sxaloqst were like this:
30. "I will go back when I am finished with my training."

31. Then Sxaloqst trained. 32. He bathed. 33. He bathed
every day. 34. He went back to the lake, where he dived.

35. He dived everywhere, looking for his weapon, so that
when he came back, he would have revenge. 36. So he dived

at Blakely Island and then went to Point Lawrence. 37. He
dived there at Point Lawrence. 38. He dived and went bathing
in every lake. 39. Then he arrived at Deception Pass, and
he dived there. 40. He came home again, and he climbed up

on Mt. Constitution. 41. And there he dived. 42. Then he
came ashore. 43. When he finished his diving, he came ashore
and rested. 44. He rested a long time, and he began to feel
sleepy. 45. Then he fell asleep. 46. He slept and dreamed
about his weapon. 47. "Your weapon is going to be like this.
48. Make it! 49. You will use it when fighting. 50. You
will be a warrior. 51. The warrior of this place will be
you." $2. Then Sxalégst thought, "It's good that I go to
take revenge on those men." 53. So he went back. 54. It
was night when he arrived at Mom1i. 5S. He went inside the
house, and he used his weapon. 56. He finished, and he

reached the next house, and he did the same thing. 57. He

finished, and he reached the next house. 58. He was doing

--- Page 78 ---
71

this until the last one. 59. There, at the house at the end,
an old man came out and said to him, "Spare me! Don'to use
your weapon: 60. If you don't, then this will be your land.
Yours will be this land. Yours will be this river.

61. Everything will be yours."' 62. Then Sxvloqst said,
"Good, it will be like this. 63. I will go home and tell

my parents that you have given me your land and your river."
64. Then Sxeléqst went home and told his parents that

a : - : :
Sdaléxen was his, and the river was his, the Sdoléxen river.

 

65. His parents believed him, and they told Sxaloqst, "We
guess it would be good if we went and looked at your land
and your river." 66. They came ashore, and oh, it truly
was Sxaloqst's. 67. It truly was his land and the river.
68. They went back to Orcas Island. 69. They went to
Lopez Island and broughtover the houses from Lopez Island.
70. They brought them to Gooseberry Point. 71. They set
up their houses from Lopez Island at Gooseberry Point.

72. (It's like this about the houses: they were crowded
where they were. 73. It was name X“lolomes. 74. The
houses were like this: 75. If people came out, then they
saw the people at the other house. 76. That's where the
name Lummi comes from, from X“lolemas. 77. The houses
weren't 'Lummi' but X“lolemes. 78. That's the name of the

village, X“lolemas. 79. That's where the name ‘Lummi!

comes from. 80. It's not Lummi but LeqamaS’ is the name,

--- Page 79 ---
Léegemas, from where these persons come, X“toZem and his
younger brother. 81. JZéqama$ is where all the people come
from, the Samish, Swinomish, Stillaguamish, Snohomish, Du-
wamish, Suquamish. 82. That's the origin of the people.
83. Everybody is from the people who lived through the
flood at Sqoléxen. 84. It was like this: the earth was
covered with water and there were the raft-people. 85. The
earth was covered with water and they made a raft which
saved them from the big tide. 86. The ground was covered
with water, but then the earth dried again, so they called
this the raft place. 87. This is a very old story, it is
not of today. 88. It is probably the ancestors of Sxeloqgst
who named the lakes and the islands. 89. The names of these
islands, the lakes, the mountains where Sxeloqst trained

are not of today. 90. Truly Sxeloqst was a powerful warrior.

 

91. Everybody knows the name of Sxeloqst. 92. He was a
warrior. 93. Everybody knows that Sxeloqst was a warrior,
a powerful warrior., 94. When the earth dried, then the
people scattered. 95. I have named those who went south,
some went north. 96. If you see your friend he will say,
"I am from the people who lived through the flood, that's
where I'm from. 97. "Oh, sir, I, too, am from the people
who lived through the flood,'' says your friend, when you see

him. 98. When you go to the Duwamish or Suquamish people,

they will say, "I am from the people who lived through the

--- Page 80 ---
73

flood." 99. These people, the Léqomas are from here.
100. That's where they came from. 101. And the talk
of the Leqeme¥ goes like this: "Their smoke will stand
up in your land. 102. Everybody will look} and it will
be the ~Léqomas that they see, the high-class people.
103. Don't let your smoke fall. 104. Don't let your

smoke fall."

